Add a Coroutine Task Type
Document #:	P3552R3 [Latest] [Status]
Date:	2025-06-20
Project:	Programming Language C++
Audience:	Concurrency Working Group (SG1)
Library Evolution Working Group (LEWG)
Library Working Group (LWG)
Reply-to:	Dietmar Kühl (Bloomberg)
<dkuhl@bloomberg.net>
Maikel Nadolski
<maikel.nadolski@gmail.com>
C++20 added support for coroutines that can improve the experience writing asynchronous code. C++26 added the sender/receiver model for a general interface to asynchronous operations. The expectation is that users would use the framework using some coroutine type. To support that, a suitable class needs to be defined and this proposal is providing such a definition.

Just to get an idea what this proposal is about: here is a simple Hello, world written using the proposed coroutine type:

#include <execution>
#include <iostream>
#include <task>

namespace ex = std::execution;

int main() {
    return std::get<0>(*ex::sync_wait([]->ex::task<int> {
        std::cout << "Hello, world!\n";
        co_return co_await ex::just(0);
    }()));
}
1 Change History
1.1 R0 Initial Revision
1.2 R1 Hagenberg Feedback
Changed the name from lazy to task based on SG1 feedback and dropped the section on why lazy was chosen.
Changed the name of any_scheduler to task_scheduler.
Added wording for the task specification.
1.3 R2 LEWG Feedback
Removed the use decay_t from the specification.
Changed the wording to avoid exception_ptr when unavailable.
Renamed Context to Environment to better reflect the argument’s use.
Made exposition-only “macros” use italics.
Added a feature test macro.
Fixed some typos.
1.4 R3 LWG Feedback
2 Prior Work
This proposal isn’t the first to propose a coroutine type. Prior proposals didn’t see any recent (post introduction of sender/receiver) update, although corresponding proposals were discussed informally on multiple occasions. There are also implementations of coroutine types based on a sender/receiver model in active use. This section provides an overview of this prior work, and where relevant, of corresponding discussions. This section is primarily for motivating requirements and describing some points in the design space.

2.1 P1056: Add lazy coroutine (coroutine task) type
The paper describes a task/lazy type (in P1056r0 the name was task; the primary change for P1056r1 is changing the name to lazy). The fundamental idea is to have a coroutine type which can be co_awaited: the interface of lazy consists of move constructor, deliberately no move assignment, a destructor, and operator co_await(). The proposals don’t go into much detail on how to eventually use a coroutine, but it mentions that there could be functions like sync_await(task<To>) to await completion of a task (similar to execution::sync_wait(sender)) or a few variations of that.

A fair part of the paper argues why future.then() is not a good approach to model coroutines and their results. Using future requires allocation, synchronisation, reference counting, and scheduling which can all be avoided when using coroutines in a structured way.

The paper also mentions support for symmetric transfer and allocator support. Both of these are details on how the coroutine is implemented.

Discussion for P1056r0 in SG1

The task doesn’t really have anything to do with concurrency.
Decomposing a task cheaply is fundamental. The HALO Optimisations help.
The task isn’t move assignable because there are better approaches than using containers to hold them. It is move constructible as there are no issues with overwriting a potentially live task.
Resuming where things complete is unsafe but the task didn’t want to impose any overhead on everybody.
There can be more than one task type for different needs.
Holding a mutex lock while co_awaiting which may resume on a different thread is hazardous. Static analysers should be able to detect these cases.
Votes confirmed the no move assignment and forwarding to LEWG assuming the name is not task.
Votes against deal with associated executors and a request to have strong language about transfer between threads.
2.2 P2506: std::lazy: a coroutine for deferred execution
This paper is effectively restating what P1056 said with the primary change being more complete proposed wording. Although sender/receiver were discussed when the paper was written but std::execution hadn’t made it into the working paper, the proposal did not take a sender/receiver interface into account.

Although there were mails seemingly scheduling a discussion in LEWG, we didn’t manage to actually locate any discussion notes.

2.3 cppcoro
This library contains multiple coroutine types, algorithms, and some facilities for asynchronous work. For the purpose of this discussion only the task types are of interest. There are two task types cppcoro::task and cppcoro::shared_task. The key difference between task and shared_task is that the latter can be copied and awaited by multiple other coroutines. As a result shared_task always produces an lvalue and may have slightly higher costs due to the need to maintain a reference count.

The types and algorithms are pre-sender/receiver and operate entirely in terms for awaiters/awaitables. The interface of both task types is a bit richer than that from P1056/P2506. Below t is either a cppcoro::task<T> or a cppcoro::shared_task<T>:

The task objects can be move constructed and move assigned; shared_task<T> object can also be copy constructed and copy assigned.
Using t.is_ready() it can be queried if t has completed.
Using co_await t awaits completion of t, yielding the result. The result may be throwing an exception if the coroutine completed by throwing.
Using co_await t.when_ready() allows synchronising with the completion of t without actually getting the result. This form of synchronisation won’t throw any exception.
cpproro::shared_task<T> also supports equality comparisons.
In both cases, the task starts suspended and is resumed when it is co_awaited. This way a continuation is known when the task is resumed, which is similar to start(op)ing an operation state op. The coroutine body needs to use co_await or co_return. co_await expects an awaitable or an awaiter as argument. Using co_yield is not supported. The implementation supports symmetric transfer but doesn’t mention allocators.

The shared_task<T> is similar to split(sender): in both cases, the same result is produced for multiple consumers. Correspondingly, there isn’t a need to support a separate shared_task<T> in a sender/receiver world. Likewise, throwing of results can be avoid by suitably rewriting the result of the set_error channel avoiding the need for an operation akin to when_ready().

2.4 libunifex
unifex is an earlier implementation of the sender/receiver ideas. Compared to std::execution it is lacking some of the flexibilities. For example, it doesn’t have a concept of environments or domains. However, the fundamental idea of three completion channels for success, failure, and cancellation and the general shape of how these are used is present (even using the same names for set_value and set_error; the equivalent of set_stopped is called set_done). unifex is in production use in multiple places. The implementation includes a unifex::task<T>.

As unifex is sender/receiver-based, its unifex::task<T> is implemented such that co_await can deal with senders in addition to awaitables or awaiters. Also, unifex::task<T> is scheduler affine: the coroutine code resumes on the same scheduler even if a sender completed on a different scheduler. The task’s scheduler is taken from the receiver it is connected to. The exception for rescheduling on the task’s scheduler is explicitly awaiting the result of schedule(sched) for some scheduler sched: the operation changes the task’s scheduler to be sched. The relevant treatment is in the promise type’s await_transform():

If a sender sndr which is the result of schedule(sched) is co_awaited, the corresponding sched is installed as the task’s scheduler and the task resumes on the context completing sndr. Feedback from people working with unifex suggests that this choice for changing the scheduler is too subtle. While it is considered important to be able to explicitly change the scheduler a task executes on, doing so should be more explicit.
For both senders and awaiters being awaited, the coroutine will be resumed on the task’s current scheduler when the task is scheduler affine. In general that is done by continuing with the senders result on the task’s scheduler, similar to continues_on(sender,   scheduler). The rescheduling is avoided when the sender is tagged as not changing scheduler (using a static constexpr member named blocking which is initialized to blocking_kind::always_inline).
If a sender is co_awaited it gets connected to a receiver provided by the task to form an awaiter holding an operation state. The operation state gets started by the awaiter’s await_suspend. The receiver arranges for a set_value completion to become a value returned from await_resume, a set_error completion to become an exception, and a set_done completion to resume a special “on done” coroutine handle rather than resuming the task itself effectively behaving like an uncatchable exception (all relevant state is properly destroyed and the coroutine is never resumed).
When co_awaiting a sender sndr there can be at most one set_value completion: if there are more than one set_value completions the promise type’s await_transform will just return sndr and the result cannot be co_awaited (unless it is also given an awaitable interface). The result type of co_await sndr depends on the number of arguments to set_value:

If there are no arguments for set_value then the type of co_await sndr will be void.
If there is exactly one argument of type T for set_value then the type of co_await sndr will be T.
If there are more than one arguments for set_value then the type of co_await sndr will be std::tuple<T1, T2, ...> with the corresponding argument types.
If a receiver doesn’t have a scheduler, it can’t be connect()ed to a unifex::task<T>. In particular, when using a unifex::async_scope scope it isn’t possible to directly call scope.spawn(task) with a unifex::task<T> task as the unifex::async_scope doesn’t provide a scheduler. The unifex::async_scope provides a few variations of spawn() which take a scheduler as argument.

unifex provides some sender algorithms to transform the sender result into something which may be more suitable to be co_awaited. For example, unifex::done_as_optional(sender) turns a successful completion for a type T into an std::optional<T> and the cancellation completion set_done into a set_value completion with a disengaged std::optional<T>.

The unifex::task<T> is itself a sender and can be used correspondingly. To deal with scheduler affinity a type erased scheduler unifex::any_scheduler is used.

The unifex::task<T> doesn’t have allocator support. When creating a task multiple objects are allocated on the heap: it seems there is a total of 6 allocations for each unifex::task<T> being created. After that, it seems the different co_awaits don’t use a separate allocation.

The unifex::task<T> doesn’t directly guard against stack overflow. Due to rescheduling continuations on a scheduler when the completion isn’t always inline, the issue only arises when co_awaiting many senders with blocking_kind::always_inline or when the scheduler resumes inline.

2.5 stdexec
The exec::task in stdexec is somewhat similar to the unifex task with some choices being different, though:

The exec::task<T, C> is also scheduler affine. The chosen scheduler is unconditionally used for every co_await, i.e., there is no attempt made to avoid scheduling, e.g., when the co_awaited sender completes inline.
Unlike unifex, it is OK if the receiver’s environment doesn’t provide a scheduler. In that case an inline scheduler is used. If an inline scheduler is used there is the possibility of stack overflow.
It is possible to co_await just_error(e) and co_await just_stopped(), i.e., the sender isn’t required to have a set_value_t completion.
The exec::task<T, C> also provides a context C. An object of this type becomes the environment for receivers connect()ed to co_awaited senders. The default context provides access to the task’s scheduler. In addition an in_place_stop_token is provides which forwards the stop requests from the environment of the receiver which is connected to the task.

Like the unifex task exec::task<T, C> doesn’t provide any allocator support. When creating a task there are two allocations.

3 Objectives
Also see sender/receiver issue 241.

Based on the prior work and discussions around corresponding coroutine support there is a number of required or desired features (listed in no particular order):

A coroutine task needs to be awaiter/awaitable friendly, i.e., it should be possibly to co_await awaitables which includes both library provided and user provided ones. While that seems obvious, it is possible to create an await_transform which is deleted for awaiters and that should be prohibited.

When composing sender algorithms without using a coroutine it is common to adapt the results using suitable algorithms and the completions for sender algorithms are designed accordingly. On the other hand, when awaiting senders in a coroutine it may be considered annoying having to transform the result into a shape which is friendly to a coroutine use. Thus, it may be reasonable to support rewriting certain shapes of completion signatures into something different to make the use of senders easier in a coroutine task. See the section on the result type for co_await for a discussion.

A coroutine task needs to be sender friendly: it is expected that asynchronous code is often written using coroutines awaiting senders. However, depending on how senders are treated by a coroutine some senders may not be awaitable. For example neither unifex nor stdexec support co_awaiting senders with more than one set_value completion.

It is possibly confusing and problematic if coroutines resume on a different execution context than the one they were suspended on: the textual similarity to normal functions makes it look as if things are executed sequentially. Experience also indicates that continuing a coroutine on whatever context a co_awaited operation completes frequently leads to issues. Senders could, however, complete on an entirely different scheduler than where they started. When composing senders (not using coroutines) changing contexts is probably OK because it is done deliberately, e.g., using continues_on, and the way to express things is new with fewer attached expectations.

To bring these two views together a coroutine task should be scheduler affine by default, i.e., it should normally resume on the same scheduler. There should probably also be an explicit way to opt out of scheduler affinity when the implications are well understood.

Note that scheduler affinity does not mean that a task is always continuing on the same thread: a scheduler may refer to a thread pool and the task will continue on one of the threads (which also means that thread local storage cannot be used to propagate contexts implicitly; see the discussion on environments below).

When using coroutines there will probably be an allocation at least for the coroutine frame (the HALO optimisations can’t always work). To support the use in environments where memory allocations using new/delete aren’t supported the coroutine task should support allocations using allocators.

Receivers have associated environments which can support an open set of queries. Normally, queries on an environment can be forwarded to the environment of a connect()ed receiver. Since the coroutine types are determined before the coroutine’s receiver is known and the queries themselves don’t specify a result type that isn’t possible when a coroutine provides a receiver to a sender in a co_await expression. It should still be possible to provide a user-customisable environment from the receiver used by co_await expressions. One aspect of this environment is to forward stop requests to co_awaited child operations. Another is possibly changing the scheduler to be used when a child operation queries get_scheduler from the receiver’s environment. Also, in non-asynchronous code it is quite common to pass some form of context implicitly using thread local storage. In an asynchronous world such contexts could be forwarded using the environment.

The coroutine should be able to indicate that it was canceled, i.e., to get set_stopped() called on the task’s receiver. std::execution::with_awaitable_senders already provided this ability senders being co_awaited but that doesn’t necessarily extend to the coroutine implementation.

Similar to indicating that a task got canceled it would be good if a task could indicate that an error occurred without throwing an exception which escapes from the coroutine.

In general a task has to assume that an exception escapes the coroutine implementation. As a result, the task’s completion signatures need to include set_error_t(std::exception_ptr). If it can be indicated to the task that no exception will escape the coroutine, this completion signature can be avoided.

When many co_awaited operations complete synchronously, there is a chance for stack overflow. It may be reasonable to have the implementation prevent stack overflow by using a suitable scheduler sometimes.

In some situations it can be useful to somehow schedule an asynchronous clean-up operation which is triggered upon coroutine exit. See the section on asynchronous clean-up below for more discussing

The task coroutine provided by the standard library may not always fit user’s needs although they may need/want various of the facilities. To avoid having users implement all functionality from scratch task should use specified components which can be used by users when building their own coroutine. The components as_awaitable and with_awaitable_sender are two parts of achieving this objective but there are likely others.

The algorithm std::execution::as_awaitable does turn a sender into an awaitable and is expected to be used by custom written coroutines. Likewise, it is intended that custom coroutines use the CRTP class template std::execution::with_awaitable_senders. It may be reasonable to adjust the functionality of these components instead of defining the functionality specific to a task<...> coroutine task.

It is important to note that different coroutine task implementations can live side by side: not all functionality has to be implemented by the same coroutine task. The objective for this proposal is to select a set of features which provides a coroutine task suitable for most uses. It may also be reasonable to provide some variations as different names. A future revision of the standard or third party libraries can also provide additional variations.

4 Design
This section discusses various design options for achieving the listed objectives. Most of the designs are independent of each other and can be left out if the consensus is that it shouldn’t be used for whatever reason.

4.1 Template Declaration for task
Coroutines can use co_return to produce a value. The value returned can reasonably provide the argument for the set_value_t completion of the coroutines. As the type of a coroutine is defined even before the coroutine body is given, there is no way to deduce the result type. The result type is probably the primary customisation and should be the first template parameter which gets defaulted to void for coroutines not producing any value. For example:

int main() {
    ex::sync_wait([]->ex::task<>{
        int result = co_await []->ex::task<int> { co_return 42; }();
        assert(result == 42);
    }());
}
The inner coroutines completes with set_value_t(int) which gets translated to the value returned from co_await (see co_await result type below for more details). The outer coroutine completes with set_value_t().

Beyond the result type there are a number of features for a coroutine task which benefit from customisation or for which it may be desirable to disable them because they introduce a cost. As many template parameters become unwieldy, it makes sense to combine these into a [defaulted] context parameter. The aspects which benefit from customisation are at least:

Customising the environment for child operations. The context itself can actually become part of the environment.
Disable scheduler affinity and/or configure the strategy for obtaining the coroutine’s scheduler.
Configure allocator awareness.
Indicate that the coroutine should be noexcept.
Define additional error types.
The default context should be used such that any empty type provides the default behaviour instead of requiring a lot of boilerplate just to configure a particular aspect. For example, it should be possible to selectively enable allocator support using something like this:

struct allocator_aware_context {
    using allocator_type = std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator<std::byte>;
};
template <class T>
using my_task = ex::task<T, allocator_aware_context>;
Using various different types for task coroutines isn’t a problem as the corresponding objects normally don’t show up in containers. Tasks are mostly co_awaited by other tasks, used as child senders when composing work graphs, or maintained until completed using something like a counting_scope. When they are used in a container, e.g., to process data using a range of coroutines, they are likely to use the same result type and context types for configurations.

4.2 task Completion Signatures
The discussion above established that task<T, C> can have a successful completion using set_value_t(T). The coroutine completes accordingly when it is exited using a matching co_return. When T is void the coroutine also completes successfully using set_value() when floating off the end of the coroutine or when using a co_return without an expression.

If a coroutine exits with an exception completing the corresponding operation with set_error(std::exception_ptr) is an obvious choice. Note that a co_await expression results in throwing an exception when the awaited operation completes with set_error(E) (see below), i.e., the coroutine itself doesn’t necessarily need to throw an exception itself.

Finally, a co_await expression completing with set_stoppped() results in aborting the coroutine immediately (see below) and causing the coroutine itself to also complete with set_stopped().

The coroutine implementation cannot inspect the coroutine body to determine how the different asynchronous operations may complete. As a result, the default completion signatures for task<T> are

ex::completion_signatures<
    ex::set_value_t(T),  // or ex::set_value_t() if T == void
    ex::set_error_t(std::exception_ptr),
    ex:set_stopped_t()
>;
Support for reporting an error without exception may modify the completion signatures.

4.3 task constructors and assignments
Coroutines are created via a factory function which returns the coroutine type and whose body uses one of the co_* function, e.g.

task<> nothing(){ co_return; }
The actual object is created via the promise type’s get_return_object function and it is between the promise and coroutine types how that actually works: this constructor is an implementation detail. To be valid senders the coroutine type needs to be destructible and it needs to have a move constructor. Other than that, constructors and assignments either don’t make sense or enable dangerous practices:

Copy constructor and copy assignment don’t make sense because there is no way to copy the actual coroutine state.

Move assignment is rather questionable because it makes it easy to transport the coroutine away from referenced entities.

Previous papers P1056 and P2506 also argued against a move assignment. However, one of the arguments doesn’t apply to the task proposed here: There is no need to deal with cancellation when assigning or destroying a task object. Upon start() of task the coroutine handle is transferred to an operation state and the original coroutine object doesn’t have any reference to the object anymore.

If there is no assignment, a default constructed object doesn’t make much sense, i.e., task also doesn’t have a default constructor.

Based on experience with Folly the suggestion was even stronger: task shouldn’t even have move construction! That would mean that task can’t be a sender or that there would need to be some internal interface enabling the necessary transfer. That direction isn’t pursued by this proposal.

The lack of move assignment doesn’t mean that task can’t be held in a container: it is perfectly fine to push_back objects of this type into a container, e.g.:

std::vector<ex::task<>> cont;
cont.emplace_back([]->ex::task<> { co_return; }());
cont.push_back([]->ex::task<> { co_return; }());
The expectation is that most of the time coroutines don’t end up in normal containers. Instead, they’d be managed by a counting_scope or hold on to by objects in a work graph composed of senders.

Technically there isn’t a problem adding a default constructor, move assignment, and a swap() function. Based on experience with similar components it seems task is better off not having them.

4.4 Result Type For co_await
When co_awaiting a sender sndr in a coroutine, sndr needs to be transformed to an awaitable. The existing approach is to use execution::as_waitable(sndr) [exex.as.awaitable] in the promise type’s await_transform and task uses that approach. The awaitable returned from as_awaitable(sndr) has the following behaviour (rcvr is the receiver the sender sndr is connected to):

When sndr completes with set_stopped(std::move(rcvr)) the function unhandled_stopped() on the promise type is called and the awaiting coroutine is never resumed. The unhandled_stopped() results in task itself also completing with set_stopped_t().

When sndr completes with set_error(std::move(rcvr), error) the coroutine is resumed and the co_await sndr expression results in error being thrown as an exceptions (with special treatment for std::error_code).

When sndr completes with set_value(std::move(rcvr), a...) the expression co_await sndr produces a result corresponding the arguments to set_value:

If the argument list is empty, the result of co_await sndr is void.
Otherwise, if the argument list contains exactly one element the result of co_await sndr is a....
Otherwise, the result of co_await sndr is std::tuple(a...).
Note that the sender sndr is allowed to have no set_value_t completion signatures. In this case the result type of the awaitable returned from as_awaitable(sndr) is declared to be void but co_await sndr would never return normally: the only ways to complete without a set_value_t completion is to complete with set_stopped(std::move(rcvr) or with set_error(std::move(rcvr), error), i.e., the expression either results in the coroutine to be never resumed or an exception being thrown.

Here is an example which summarises the different supported result types:

task<> fun() {
    co_await ex::just();                               // void
    auto v = co_await ex::just(0);                     // int
    auto[i, b, c] = co_await ex::just(0, true, 'c');   // tuple<int, bool, char>
    try { co_await ex::just_error(0); } catch (int) {} // exception
    co_await ex::just_stopped();                       // cancel: never resumed
}
The sender sndr can have at most one set_value_t completion signature: if there are more than one set_value_t completion signatures as_awaitable(sndr) is invalid and fails to compile: users who want to co_await a sender with more than one set_value_t completions need to use co_await into_variant(s) (or similar) to transform the completion signatures appropriately. It would be possible to move this transformation into as_awaitable(sndr).

Using effectively into_variant(s) isn’t the only possible transformation if there are multiple set_value_t transformations. To avoid creating a fairly hard to use result object, as_awaitable(sndr) could detect certain usage patterns and rather create a result which is easier to use when being co_awaited. An example for this situation is the queue.async_pop() operation for concurrent queues: this operation can complete successfully in two ways:

When an object was extracted the operation completes with set_value(std::move(rcvr), value).
When the queue was closed the operation completes with set_value(std::move(rcvr)).
Turning the result of queue.async_pop() into an awaitable using the current as_awaitable(queue.async_pop()) ([exec.as.awaitable]) fails because the function accepts only senders with at most one set_value_t completion. Thus, it is necessary to use something like the below:

task<> pop_demo(auto& queue) {
    // auto value = co_await queue.async_pop(); // doesn't work
    std::optional v0 = co_await (queue.async_pop() | into_optional);
    std::optional v1 = co_await into_optional(queue.async_pop());
}
The algorithm into_optional(sndr) would determine that there is exactly one set_value_t completion with arguments and produce an std::optional<T> if there is just one parameter of type T and produce a std::optional<std::tuple<T...>> if there are more than one parameter with types T.... It would be possible to apply this transformation when a corresponding set of completions is detected. The proposal optional variants in sender/receiver goes into this direction.

This proposal currently doesn’t propose a change to as_awaitable ([exec.as.awaitable]). The primary reason is that there are likely many different shapes of completions each with a different desirable transformation. If these are all absorbed into as_awaitable it is likely fairly hard to reason what exact result is returned. Also, there are likely different options of how a result could be transformed: into_optional is just one example. It could be preferable to turn the two results into an std::expected instead. However, there should probably be some transformation algorithms like into_optional, into_expected, etc. similar to into_variant.

4.5 Scheduler Affinity
Coroutines look very similar to synchronous code with a few co-keywords sprinkled over the code. When reading such code the expectation is typically that all code executes on the same context despite some co_await expressions using senders which may explicitly change the scheduler. There are various issues when using co_await naïvely:

Users may expect that work continues on the same context where it was started. If the coroutine simply resumes when the co_awaited senders calls a completion function code may execute some lengthy operation on a context which is expected to keep a UI responsive or which is meant to deal with I/O.
Conversely, running a loop co_awaiting some work may be seen as unproblematic but may actually easily cause a stack overflow if co_awaited work immediately completes (also see below).
When co_awaiting some work completes on a different context and later a blocking call is made from the coroutine which also ends up co_awaiting some work from the same resource there can be a dead lock.
Thus, the execution should normally be scheduled on the original scheduler: doing so can avoid the problems mentioned above (assuming a scheduler is used which doesn’t immediately complete without actually scheduling anything). This transfer of the execution with a coroutine is referred to as scheduler affinity. Note: a scheduler may execute on multiple threads, e.g., for a pool scheduler: execution would get to any of these threads, i.e., thread local storage is not guaranteed to access the same data even with scheduler affinity. Also, scheduling work has some cost even if this cost can often be fairly small.

The basic idea for scheduler affinity consists of a few parts:

A scheduler is determined when starting an operation state which resulted from connecting a coroutine to a receiver. This scheduler is used to resume execution of the coroutine. The scheduler is determined based on the receiver rcvr’s environment.

auto scheduler = get_scheduler(get_env(rcvr));
The type of scheduler is unknown when the coroutine is created. Thus, the coroutine implementation needs to operate in terms of a scheduler with a known type which can be constructed from scheduler. The used scheduler type is determined based on the context parameter C of the coroutine type task<T, C> using typename C::scheduler_type and defaults to task_scheduler if this type isn’t defined. task_scheduler uses type-erasure to deal with arbitrary schedulers (and small object optimisations to avoid allocations). The used scheduler type can be parameterised to allow use of task contexts where the scheduler type is known, e.g., to avoid the costs of type erasure.

Originally task_scheduler was called any_scheduler but there was feedback from SG1 suggesting that a general any_scheduler may need to cover various additional properties. To avoid dealing with generalizing the facility a different name is used. The name remains specified as it is still a useful component, at least until an any_scheduler is defined by the standard library. If necessary, the type erased scheduler type used by task can be unspecified.

When an operation which is co_awaited completes the execution is transferred to the held scheduler using continues_on. Injecting this operation into the graph can be done in the promise type’s await_transform:

template <ex::sender Sender>
auto await_transform(Sender&& sndr) noexcept {
    return ex::as_awaitable_sender(
        ex::continues_on(std::forward<Sender>(sndr),
                         this->scheduler);
    );
}
There are a few immediate issues with the basic idea:

What should happen if there is no scheduler, i.e., get_scheduler(get_env(rcvr)) doesn’t exist?
What should happen if the obtained scheduler is incompatible with the coroutine’s scheduler?
Scheduling isn’t free and despite the potential problems it should be possible to use task without scheduler affinity.
When operations are known to complete inline the scheduler isn’t actually changed and the scheduling operation should be avoided.
It should be possible to explicitly change the scheduler used by a coroutine from within this coroutine.
All of these issues can be addressed although there are different choices in some of these cases.

In many cases the receiver can provide access to a scheduler via the environment query. An example where no scheduler is available is when starting a task on a counting_scope. The scope doesn’t know about any schedulers and, thus, the receiver used by counting_scope when connecting to a sender doesn’t support the get_scheduler query, i.e., this example doesn’t work:

ex::spawn([]->ex::task<void> { co_await ex::just(); }(), token);
Using spawn() with coroutines doing the actual work is expected to be quite common, i.e., it isn’t just a theoretical possibility that task is used together with counting_scope. The approach used by unifex is to fail compilation when trying to connect a Task to a receiver without a scheduler. The approach taken by stdexec is to keep executing inline in that case. Based on the experience that silently changing contexts within a coroutine frequently causes bugs it seems failing to compile is preferable.

Failing to construct the scheduler used by a coroutine with the scheduler obtained from the receiver is likely an error and should be addressed by the user appropriately. Failing to compile is seems to be a reasonable approach in that case, too.

It should be possible to avoid scheduler affinity explicitly to avoid the cost of scheduling. Users should be very careful when pursuing this direction but it can be a valid option. One way to achieve that is to create an “inline scheduler” which immediately completes when it is start()ed and using this type for the coroutine. Explicitly providing a type inline_scheduler implementing this logic could allow creating suitable warnings. It would also allow detecting that type in await_transform and avoiding the use of continues_on entirely.

When operations actually don’t change the scheduler there shouldn’t be a need to schedule them again. In these cases it would be great if the continues_on could be avoided. At the moment there is no way to tell whether a sender will complete inline. Using a sender query which determines whether a sender always completes inline could avoid the rescheduling. Something like that is implemented for unifex: senders define a property blocking which can have the value blocking_kind::always_inline. The proposal A sender query for completion behaviour proposes a get_completion_behaviour(sndr, env) customisation point to address this need. The result can indicate that the sndr returns synchronously (using completion_behaviour::synchronous or completion_behaviour::inline_completion). If sndr returns synchronously there isn’t a need to reschedule it.

In some situations it is desirable to explicitly switch to a different scheduler from within the coroutine and from then on carry on using this scheduler. unifex detects the use of co_await schedule(scheduler); for this purpose. That is, however, somewhat subtle. It may be reasonable to use a dedicated awaiter for this purpose and use, e.g.

auto previous = co_await co_continue_on(new_scheduler);
Using this statement replaces the coroutine’s scheduler with the new_scheduler. When the co_await completes it is on new_scheduler and further co_await operations complete on new_scheduler. The result of co_awaiting co_continue_on is the previously used scheduler to allow transfer back to this scheduler. In stdexec the corresponding operation is called reschedule_coroutine.

Another advantage of scheduling the operations on a scheduler instead of immediately continuing on the context where the operation completed is that it helps with stack overflows: when scheduling on a non-inline scheduler the call stack is unwound. Without that it may be necessary to inject scheduling just for the purpose of avoiding stack overflow when too many operations complete inline.

4.6 Allocator Support
When using coroutines at least the coroutine frame may end up being allocated on the heap: the HALO optimisations aren’t always possible, e.g., when a coroutine becomes a child of another sender. To control how this allocation is done and to support environments where allocations aren’t possible task should have allocator support. The idea is to pick up on a pair of arguments of type std::allocator_arg_t and an allocator type being passed and use the corresponding allocator if present. For example:

struct allocator_aware_context {
    using allocator_type = std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator<std::byte>;
};

template <class...A>
ex::task<int, allocator_aware_context> fun(int value, A&&...) {
    co_return value;
}

int main() {
    // Use the coroutine without passing an allocator:
    ex::sync_wait(fun(17));

    // Use the coroutine with passing an allocator:
    using allocator_type = std::pmr::polymorphic_alloctor<std::byte>;
    ex::sync_wait(fun(17, std::allocator_arg, allocator_type()));
}
The arguments passed when creating the coroutine are made available to an operator new of the promise type, i.e., this operator can extract the allocator, if any, from the list of parameters and use that for the purpose of allocation. The matching operator delete gets passed only the pointer to release and the originally requested size. To have access to the correct allocator in operator delete the allocator either needs to be stateless or a copy needs to be accessible via the pointer passed to operator delete, e.g., stored at the offset size.

To avoid any cost introduced by type erasing an allocator type as part of the task definition the expected allocator type is obtained from the context argument C of task<T, C>:

using allocator_type = ex::allocator_of_t<C>;
This using alias uses typename C::allocator_type if present or defaults to std::allocator<std::byte> otherwise. This allocator_type has to be for the type std::byte (if necessary it is possible to relax that constraint).

The allocator used for the coroutine frame should also be used for any other allocators needed for the coroutine itself, e.g., when type erasing something needed for its operation (although in most cases a small object optimisation would be preferable and sufficient). Also, the allocator should be made available to child operations via the respective receiver’s environment using the get_allocator query. The arguments passed to the coroutine are also available to the constructor of the promise type (if there is a matching on) and the allocator can be obtained from there:

struct allocator_aware_context {
    using allocator_type = pmr::polymorphic_allocator<std::byte>;
};
fixed_resource<2048> resource;

ex::sync_wait([](auto&&, auto* resource)
        -> ex::task<void, allocator_aware_context> {
    auto alloc = co_await ex::read_env(ex::get_allocator);
    use(alloc);
}(allocator_arg, &resource));
4.7 Environment Support
When co_awaiting child operations these may want to access an environment. Ideally, the coroutine would expose the environment from the receiver it gets connected to. Doing so isn’t directly possible because the coroutine types doesn’t know about the receiver type which in turn determines the environment type. Also, the queries don’t know the type they are going to return. Thus, some extra mechanisms are needed to provide an environment.

A basic environment can be provided by some entities already known to the coroutine, though:

The get_scheduler query should provide the scheduler maintained for scheduler affinity whose type is determined based on the coroutine’s context using ex::scheduler_of_t<C>.
The get_allocator query should provide the coroutine’s allocator whose type is determined based on the coroutine’s context using ex::allocator_of_t<C>. The allocator gets initialized when constructing the promise type.
The get_stop_token query should provide a stop token from a stop source which is linked to the stop token obtained from the receiver’s environment. The type of the stop source is determined from the coroutine’s context using ex::stop_source_of_t<C> and defaults to ex::inplace_stop_source. Linking the stop source can be delayed until the first stop token is requested or omitted entirely if stop_possible() returns false or if the stop token type of the coroutine’s receiver matches that of ex::stop_source_of_t<C>.
For any other environment query the context C of task<T, C> can be used. The coroutine can maintain an instance of type C. In many cases queries from the environment of the coroutine’s receiver need to be forwarded. Let env be get_env(receiver) and Env be the type of env. C gets optionally constructed with access to the environment:

If C::env_type<Env> is a valid type the coroutine state will contain an object own_env of this type which is constructed with env. The object own_env will live at least as long as the C object maintained and C is constructed with a reference to own_env, allowing C to reference type-erased representations for query results it needs to forward.
Otherwise, if C(env) is valid the C object is constructed with the result of get_env(receiver). Constructing the context with the receiver’s environment provides the opportunity to store whatever data is needed from the environment to later respond to queries as well.
Otherwise, C is default constructed. This option typically applies if C doesn’t need to provide any environment queries.
Any query which isn’t provided by the coroutine but is available from the context C is forwarded. Any other query shouldn’t be part of the overload set.

For example:

struct context {
    int value{};
    int query(get_value_t const&) const noexcept { return this->value; }
    context(auto const& env): value(get_value(env)) {}
};

int main() {
    ex::sync_wait(
        ex::write_env(
            []->demo::task<void, context> {
                auto sched(co_await ex::read_env(get_scheduler));
                auto value(co_await ex::read_env(get_value));
                std::cout << "value=" << value << "\n";
                // ...
            }(),
            ex::make_env(get_value, 42)
        )
    );
}
4.8 Support For Requesting Cancellation/Stopped
When a coroutine task executes the actual work it may listen to a stop token to recognise that it got canceled. Once it recognises that its work should be stopped it should also complete with set_stopped(rcvr). There is no special syntax needed as that is the result of using just_stopped():

co_await ex::just_stopped();
The sender just_stopped() completes with set_stopped() causing the coroutine to be canceled. Any other sender completing with set_stopped() can also be used.

4.9 Error Reporting
The sender/receiver approach to error reporting is for operations to complete with a call to set_error(rcvr, err) for some receiver object rcvr and an error value err. The details of the completions are used by algorithms to decide how to proceed. For example, if any of the senders of when_all(sndr...) fails with a set_error_t completion the other senders are stopped and the overall operation fails itself forwarding the first error. Thus, it should be possible for coroutines to complete with a set_error_t completion. Using a set_value_t completion using an error value isn’t quite the same as these are not detected as errors by algorithms.

The error reporting used for unifex and stdexec is to turn an exception escaping from the coroutine into a set_error_t(std::exception_ptr) completion: when unhandled_exception() is called on the promise type the coroutine is suspended and the function can just call set_value(r, std::get_current_exception()). There are a few limitations with this approach:

The only supported error completion is set_error_t(std::exception_ptr). While the thrown exception can represent any error type and set_error_t completions from co_awaited operations resulting in the corresponding error being thrown it is better if the other error types can be reported, too.
To report an error an exception needs to be thrown. In some environments it is preferred to not throw exception or exceptions may even be entirely banned or disabled which means that there isn’t a way to report errors from coroutines unless a different mechanism is provided.
To extract the actual error information from std::exception_ptr the exception has to be rethrown.
The completion signatures for task<T, C> necessarily contain set_error_t(std::exception_ptr) which is problematic when exceptions are unavailable: std::exception_ptr may also be unavailable. Also, without exception as it is impossible to decode the error. It can be desirable to have coroutine which don’t declare such a completion signature.
Before going into details on how errors can be reported it is necessary to provide a way for task<T, C> to control the error completion signatures. Similar to the return type the error types cannot be deduced from the coroutine body. Instead, they can be declared using the context type C:

If present, typename C::error_signatures is used to declare the error types. This type needs to be a specialisation of completion_signatures listing the valid set_error_t completions.
If this nested type is not present, completion_signatures<set_error_t(std::exception_ptr)> is used as a default.
The name can be adjusted and it would be possible to use a different type list template and listing the error types. The basic idea would remain the same, i.e., the possible error types are declared via the context type.

Reporting an error by having an exception escape the coroutine is still possible but it doesn’t necessarily result in a set_error_t: If an exception escapes the coroutine and set_error_t(std::exception_ptr) isn’t one of the supported the set_error_t completions, std::terminate() is called. If an error is explicitly reported somehow, e.g., using one of the approaches described below, and the error type isn’t supported by the context’s error_signatures, the program is ill-formed.

The discussion below assumes the use of the class template with_error<E> to indicate that the coroutine completed with an error. It can be as simple as

template <class E> struct with_error{ E error; };
The name can be different although it shouldn’t collide with already use names (like error_code or upon_error). Also, in some cases there isn’t really a need to wrap the error into a recognisable class template. Using a marker type probably helps with readability and avoiding ambiguities in other cases.

Besides exceptions there are three possible ways how a coroutine can be exited:

The coroutine is exited when using co_return, optionally with an argument. Flowing off the end of a coroutine is equivalent to explicitly using co_return; instead of flowing off. It would be possible to turn the use of

co_return with_error{err};
into a set_error(std::move(rcvr), err) completion.

One restriction with this approach is that for a task<void, C> the body can’t contain co_return with_error{e};: the void result requires that the promise type contains a function return_void() and if that is present it isn’t possible to also have a return_value(T).

When a coroutine uses co_await a; the coroutine is in a suspended state when await_suspend(...) of some awaiter is entered. While the coroutine is suspended it can be safely destroyed. It is possible to complete the coroutine in that state and have the coroutine be cleaned up. This approach is used when the awaited operation completes with set_stopped(). It is possible to call set_error(std::move(rcvr), err) for some receiver rcvr and error err obtained via the awaitable a. Thus, using

co_await with_error{err};
could complete with set_error(std::move(rcvr), err).

Using the same notation for awaiting outstanding operations and returning results from a coroutine is, however, somewhat surprising. The name of the awaiter may need to become more explicit like exist_coroutine_with_error if this approach should be supported.

When a coroutine uses co_yield v; the promise member yield_value(T) is called which can return an awaiter a. When a’s await_suspend() is called, the coroutine is suspended and the operation can complete accordingly. Thus, using

co_yield with_error{err};
could complete with set_error(std::move(rcvr), err). Using co_yield for the purpose of returning from a coroutine with a specific result seems more expected than using co_await.

There are technically viable options for returning an error from a coroutine without requiring exceptions. Whether any of them is considered suitable from a readability point of view is a separate question.

One concern which was raised with just not resuming the coroutine is that the time of destruction of variables used by the coroutine is different. The promise object can be destroyed before completing which might address the concern.

Using co_await or co_yield to propagate error results out of the coroutine has a possibly interesting variation: in both of these case the error result may be conditionally produced, i.e., it is possible to complete with an error sometimes and to produce a value at other times. That could allow a pattern (using co_yield for the potential error return):

auto value = co_yield when_error(co_await into_expected(sender));
The subexpression into_expected(sender) could turn the set_value_t and set_error_t into a suitable std::expected<V, std::variant<E...>> always reported using a set_value_t completion (so the co_await doesn’t throw). The corresponding std::expected becomes the result of the co_await. Using co_yield with when_error(exp) where exp is an expected can then either produce exp.value() as the result of the co_yield expression or it can result in the coroutine completing with the error from exp.error(). Using this approach produces a fairly compact approach to propagating the error retaining the type and without using exceptions.

4.10 Avoiding Stack Overflow
It is easy to use a coroutine to accidentally create a stack overflow because loops don’t really execute like loops. For example, a coroutine like this can easily result in a stack overflow:

ex::sync_wait(ex::write_env(
    []() -> ex::task<void> {
        for (int i{}; i < 1000000; ++i)
            co_await ex::just(i);
    }(),
    ex::make_env(ex::get_scheduler, ex::inline_scheduler{})
));
The reason this innocent looking code creates a stack overflow is that the use of co_await results in some function calls to suspend the coroutine and then further function calls to resume the coroutine (for a proper explanation see, e.g., Lewis Baker’s Understanding Symmetric Transfer). As a result, the stack grows with each iteration of the loop until it eventually overflows.

With senders it is also not possible to use symmetric transfer to combat the problem: to achieve the full generality and composing senders, there are still multiple function calls used, e.g., when producing the completion signal. Using get_completion_behaviour from the proposal A sender query for completion behaviour could allow detecting senders which complete synchronously. In these cases the stack overflow could be avoided relying on symmetric transfer.

When using scheduler affinity the transfer of control via a scheduler which doesn’t complete immediately does avoid the risk of stack overflow: even when the co_awaited work immediately completes as part of the await_suspend call of the created awaiter the coroutine isn’t immediately resumed. Instead, the work is scheduled and the coroutine is suspended. The thread unwinds its stack until it reaches its own scheduling and picks up the next entity to execute.

When using sync_wait(sndr) the run_loop’s scheduler is used and it may very well just resume the just suspended coroutine: when there is scheduling happening as part of scheduler affinity it doesn’t mean that work gets scheduled on a different thread!

The problem with stack overflows does remain when the work resumes immediately despite using scheduler affinity. That may be the case when using an inline scheduler, i.e., a scheduler with an operation state whose start() immediately completes: the scheduled work gets executed as soon as set_value(std::move(rcvr)) is called.

Another potential for stack overflows is when optimising the behaviour for work which is known to not move to another scheduler: in that case there isn’t really any need to use continue_on to get back to the scheduler where the operation was started! The execution remained on that scheduler all along. However, not rescheduling the work means that the stack isn’t unwound.

Since task uses scheduler affinity by default, stack overflow shouldn’t be a problem and there is no separate provision required to combat stack overflow. If the implementation chooses to avoid rescheduling work it will need to make sure that doing so doesn’t cause any problems, e.g., by rescheduling the work sometimes. When using an inline scheduler the user will need to be very careful to not overflow the stack or cause any of the various other problems with executing immediately.

4.11 Asynchronous Clean-Up
Asynchronous clean-up of objects is an important facility. Both unifex and stdexec provide some facilities for asynchronous clean-up in their respective coroutine task. Based on the experience the recommendation is to do something different!

The recommended direction is to support asynchronous resources independent of a coroutine task. For example the async-object proposal is in this direction. There is similar work ongoing in the context of Folly. Thus, there is currently no plan to support asynchronous clean-up as part of the task implementation. Instead, it can be composed based on other facilities.

5 Caveats
The use of coroutines introduces some issues which are entirely independent of how specific coroutines are defined. Some of these were brought up on prior discussions but they aren’t anything which can be solved as part of any particular coroutine implementation. In particular:

As co_awaiting the result of an operation (or co_yielding a value) may suspend a coroutine, there is a potential to introduce problems when resources which are meant to be held temporarily are held when suspending. For example, holding a lock to a mutex while suspending a coroutine can result in a different thread trying to release the lock when the coroutine is resumed (scheduler affinity will move the resumed coroutine to the same scheduler but not to the same thread).
Destroying a coroutine is only safe when it is suspended. For the task implementation that means that it shall only call a completion handler once the coroutine is suspended. That part is under the control of the coroutine implementation. However, there is no way to guard against users explicitly destroying a coroutine from within its implementation or from another thread while it is not suspended: that’s akin to destroying an object while it being used.
Debugging asynchronous code doesn’t work with the normal approaches: there is generally no suitable stack as work gets resumed from some run loop which doesn’t tell what set up the original work. To improve on this situation, async stack traces linking different pieces of outstanding work together can help. At CppCon 2024 Ian Petersen and Jessica Wong presented how that may work (watch the video). Implementations should consider adding corresponding support and enhance tooling, e.g., debuggers, to pick up on async stack traces. However, async stack support itself isn’t really something which one coroutine implementation can enable.
While these issues are important this proposal isn’t the right place to discuss them. Discussion of these issues should be delegated to suitable proposals wanting to improve this situation in some form.

6 Questions
This section lists questions based on the design discussion above. Each one has a recommendation and a vote is only needed if there opinions deviating from the recommendation.

Result type: expand as_awaitable(sndr) to support more than one set_value_t(T...) completion? Recommendation: no.
Result type: add transformation algorithms like into_optional, into_expected? Recommendation: no, different proposals.
Scheduler affinity: should task support scheduler affinity? Recommendation: yes.
Scheduler affinity: require a get_scheduler() query on the receiver’s environments? Recommendation: yes.
Scheduler affinity: add a definition for inline_scheduler (using whatever name) to support disabling scheduler affinity? Recommendation: yes.
Allocator support: should task support allocators (default std::allocator<std::byte>)? Recommendation: yes.
Error reporting: should it be possible to return an error without throwing an exception? Recommendation: yes.
Error reporting: how should errors be reported? Recommendation: using `co_yield with_error(e).
Error reporting: should co_yield when_error(expected) be supported? Recommendation: yes (although weakly).
Clean-up: should asynchronous clean-up be supported? Recommendation: no.
7 Implementation
An implementation of task as proposed in this document is available from beman::task. This implementation hasn’t received much use, yet, as it is fairly new. It is setup to be buildable and provides some examples as a starting point for experimentation.

Coroutine tasks very similar although not identical to the one proposed are used in multiple projects. In particular, there are three implementations in wide use:

Folly::Task
unifex::Task
stdexec::task
The first one (Folly::Task) isn’t based on sender/receiver. Usage experience from all three have influenced the design of task.

8 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Ian Petersen, Alexey Spiridonov, and Lee Howes for comments on drafts of this proposal and general guidance.

9 Proposed Wording
In [version.syn], add a row

#define __cpp_lib_task YYYMML // also in <execution>
In [except.terminate] paragraph 1 add this bullet at the end of Note 1:

[ Note: These situations are

…

when unhandled_stopped is called on a with_awaitable_senders object ([exec.with.awaitable.senders]) whose continuation is not a handle to a coroutine whose promise type has an unhandled_stopped member function., or

when an exception is thrown from a coroutine std::execution::task which doesn’t support a std::execution::set_error_t(std::execption_ptr) completion.
— end note ]
In 33.4 [execution.syn] add declarations for the new classes:

namespace std::execution {
  ...
  // [exec.with.awaitable.senders]
  template<class-type Promise>
    struct with_awaitable_senders;
  // [exec.affine.on]
  struct affine_on_t { unspecified  };
  inline constexpr affine_on_t affine_on;

  // [exec.inline.scheduler]
  class inline_scheduler;

  // [exec.task.scheduler]
  class task_scheduler;

  // [exec.task]
  template <class T, class Environment>
  class task;
}
Add new subsections for the different classes at the end of 33 [exec]:

[ Drafting note: Evertyhing below is text meant to go to the end of the 33 [exec] section without any color highlight of what it being added. ]

9.1 execution::affine_on [exec.affine.on]
1affine_on adapts a sender into one that completes on the specified scheduler. If the algorithm determines that the adapted sender already completes on the correct scheduler it can avoid any scheduling operation.

2The name affine_on denotes a pipeable sender adaptor object. For subexpressions sch and sndr, if decltype((sch)) does not satisfy scheduler, or decltype((sndr)) does not satisfy sender, affine_on(sndr, sch) is ill-formed.

3Otherwise, the expression affine_on(sndr, sch) is expression-equivalent to:

    transform_sender(get-domain-early(sndr), make-sender(affine_on, sch, sndr))
except that sndr is evalutated only once.

4The exposition-only class template impls-for is specialized for affine_on_t as follows:

  namespace std::execution {
    template <>
    struct impls-for<affine_on_t>: default-impls {
      static constexpr auto get-attrs =
        [](const auto& data, const auto& child) noexcept -> decltype(auto) {
          return JOIN-ENV(SCHED-ATTRS(data), FWD-ENV(get_env(child)));
        };
    };
  }
5Let out_sndr be a subexpression denoting a sender returned from affine_on(sndr, sch) or one equal to such, and let OutSndr be the type decltype((out_sndr)). Let out_rcvr be a subexpression denoting a receiver that has an environment of type Env such that sender_in<OutSndr, Env> is true. Let op be an lvalue referring to the operation state that results from connecting out_sndr to out_rcvr. Calling start(op) will start sndr on the current execution agent and execute completion operations on out_rcvr on an execution agent of the execution resource associated with sch. If the current execution resource is the same as the execution resource associated with sch, the completion operation on out_rcvr may be called before start(op) completes. If scheduling onto sch fails, an error completion on out_rcvr shall be executed on an unspecified execution agent.

9.2 execution::inline_scheduler [exec.inline.scheduler]
namespace std::execution {
  class inline_scheduler {
    class inline-sender; // exposition only
    template <receiver R>
    class inline-state;  // exposition only

  public:
    using scheduler_concept = scheduler_t;

    constexpr inline-sender schedule() noexcept { return {}; }
    constexpr bool operator== (const inline_scheduler&) const noexcept = default;
  };
}
1inline_scheduler is a class that models scheduler [exec.scheduler]. All objects of type inline_scheduler are equal.

2inline-sender is an exposition-only type that satisfies sender. The type
completion_signatures_of_t<inline-sender> is completion_signatures<set_value_t()>.

3Let sndr be an expression of type inline-sender, let rcvr be an expression such that receiver_of<decltype((rcvr)), CS> is true where CS is completion_signatures<set_value_t()>, then:

(3.1)the expression connect(sndr, rcvr) has type inline-state<remove_cvref_t<decltype((rcvr))>> and is potentially-throwing if and only if ((void)sndr, auto(rcvr)) is potentially-throwing, and
(3.2)the expression get_completion_scheduler<set_value_t>(get_env(sndr)) has type inline_scheduler and is potentially-throwing if and only if get_env(sndr) is potentially-throwing.
4Let o be a non-const lvalue of type inline-state<Rcvr>, and let REC(o) be a non-const lvalue reference to an object of type Rcvr that was initialized with the expression rcvr passed to an invocation of connect that returned o, then:

(4.1)the object to which REC(o) refers remains valid for the lifetime of the object to which o refers, and
(4.2)the expression start(o) is equivalent to set_value(std::move(REC(o))).
9.3 execution::task_scheduler [exec.task.scheduler]
namespace std::execution {
  class task_scheduler {
    class sender; // exposition only
    template <receiver R>
    class state;  // exposition only

  public:
    using scheduler_concept = scheduler_t;

    template <class Sch, class Allocator = allocator<byte>>
      requires (!same_as<task_scheduler, remove_cvref_t<Sch>>)
        && scheduler<Sch>
    explicit task_scheduler(Sch&& sch, Allocator alloc = {});

    sender schedule();

    friend bool operator== (const task_scheduler& lhs, const task_scheduler& rhs)
        noexcept;
    template <class Sch>
      requires (!same_as<task_scheduler, Sch>)
      && scheduler<Sch>
    friend bool operator== (const task_scheduler& lhs, const Sch& rhs) noexcept;

    private:
      shared_ptr<void> sch_; // exposition only
  };
}
1task_scheduler is a class that models scheduler [exec.scheduler]. Given on object s of type task_scheduler, let SCHED(s) be the object owned by s.sch_.

template <class Sch, class Allocator = allocator<void>>
  requires(!same_as<task_scheduler, remove_cvref_t<Sch>>) && scheduler<Sch>
explicit task_scheduler(Sch&& sch, Allocator alloc = {});
2Effects: Initialize sch_ with allocate_shared<remove_cvref_t<Sch>>(alloc, std::forward<Sch>(sch)).

3Recommended practice: Implementations should avoid the use of dynamically allocated memory for small scheduler objects.

4Remarks: Any allocations performed by construction of sender or state objects resulting from calls on *this are performed using a copy of alloc.

sender schedule();
5Effects: Returns an object of type sender containing a sender initialized with schedule(SCHED(*this)).

bool operator== (const task_scheduler& lhs, const task_scheduler& rhs) noexcept;
6Effects: Equivalent to: return lhs == SCHED(rhs);

template <class Sch>
  requires (!same_as<task_scheduler, Sch>)
        && scheduler<Sch>
bool operator== (const task_scheduler& lhs, const Sch& rhs) noexcept;
7Returns: false if type of SCHED(lhs) is not Sch, otherwise SCHED(lhs) == rhs;

class task_scheduler::sender { // exposition only
public:
  using sender_concept = sender_t;

  template <receiver R>
  state<R> connect(R&& rcvr);
};
8sender is an exposition-only class that models sender [exec.sender] and for which completion_signatures_of_t<sender> denotes:

completion_signatures<
  set_value_t(),
  set_error_t(error_code),
  set_error_t(exception_ptr),
  set_stopped_t()>
9Let sch be an object of type task_scheduler and let sndr be an object of type sender obtained from schedule(sch). Then get_completion_scheduler<set_value_t>(get_env(sndr)) == sch is true. The object SENDER(sndr) is the sender object contained by sndr or an object move constructed from it.

template<receiver Rcvr>
state<Rcvr> connect(Rcvr&& rcvr);
10Effects: Let r be an object of a type that models receiver and whose completion handlers result in invoking the corresponding completion handlers of rcvr or copy thereof. Returns an object of type state<Rcvr> containing an operation state object initialized with connect(SENDER(*this), std::move(r)).

template <receiver R>
class task_scheduler::state { // exposition only
public:
  using operation_state_concept = operation_state_t;

  void start() & noexcept;
};
11state is an exposition-only class template whose specializations model operation_state 33.8 [exec.opstate].

void start() & noexcept;
12Effects: Equivalent to start(st) where st is the operation state object contained by *this.

9.4 execution::task [exec.task]
9.4.1 task Overview [task.overview]
1The task class template represents a sender that can be used as the return type of coroutines. The first template parameter T defines the type value completion datum (33.3 [exec.async.ops]) if T is not void. Otherwise, there are no value completion datums. Inside coroutines returning task<T, E> the operand of co_return (if any) becomes the argument of set_value. The second template parameter Environment is used to customize the behavior of task.

9.4.2 Class template task [task.class]
namespace std::execution {
  template <class T, class Environment>
  class task {
    // [task.state]
    template <receiver R>
    class state; // exposition only

  public:
    using sender_concept = sender_t;
    using completion_signatures = see below;
    using allocator_type = see below;
    using scheduler_type = see below;
    using stop_source_type = see below;
    using stop_token_type = decltype(declval<stop_source_type>().get_token());
    using error_types = see below;

    // [task.promise]
    class promise_type;

    task(task&&) noexcept;
    ~task();

    template <receiver R>
    state<R> connect(R&& recv);

  private:
    coroutine_handle<promise_type> handle; // exposition only
  };
}
1task<T, E> models sender 33.9 [exec.snd] if T is void, a reference type, or an cv-unqualified non-array object type and E is class type. Otherwise a program that instantiates the definition of task<T, E> is ill-formed.

2The nested types of task template specializations are determined based on the Environment parameter:

(2.1)allocator_type is Environment::allocator_type if that qualified-id is valid and denotes a type, allocator<byte> otherwise.
(2.2)scheduler_type is Environment::scheduler_type if that qualified-id is valid and denotes a type, task_scheduler otherwise.
(2.3)stop_source_type is Environment::stop_source_type if that qualified-id is valid and denotes a type, inplace_stop_source otherwise.
(2.4)error_types is Environment::error_types if that qualified-id is valid and denotes a type, completion_signatures<set_error_t(exception_ptr)> otherwise.
3A program is ill-formed if error_types is not a specialization of completion_signatures<ErrorSigs...> or ErrorSigs contains an element which is not of the form set_error_t(E) for some type E.

4The type alias completion_signatures is a specialization of execution::completion_signatures with the template arguments (in unspecified order):

(4.1)set_value_t() if T is void, and set_value_t(T) otherwise;
(4.2)template arguments of the specialization of execution::completion_signatures denoted by error_types; and
(4.3)set_stopped_t().
5allocator_type shall meet the Cpp17Allocator requirements.

9.4.3 Task Members [task.members]
task(task&& other) noexcept;
1Effects: Initializes handle with exchange(other.handle, {}).

~task();
2Effects: Equivalent to:

    if (handle)
      handle.destroy();
template <receiver R>
state<R> connect(R&& recv);
3Preconditions: bool(handle) is true.

4Effects: Equivalent to: return state<R>(exchange(handle, {}), std::forward<R>(recv));

9.4.4 Class template task::state [task.state]
namespace std::execution {
  template <class T, class Environment>
    template <receiver R>
  class task<T, Environment>::state { // exposition only
  public:
    using operation_state_concept = operation_state_t;

    template <class Rcvr>
    state(coroutine_handle<promise_type> h, Rcvr&& rr);
    ~state();
    void start() & noexcept;

private:
    using own-env-t = see below;     // exposition only
    coroutine_handle<promise_type> handle;  // exposition only
    remove_cvref_t<R>              rcvr;    // exposition only
    own-env-t                      own-env; // exposition only
    Environment                    environment; // exposition only
  };
}
1The type own-env-t is Environment::template env_type<decltype(get_env(declval<R>()))> if that qualified-id is valid and denotes a type, env<> otherwise.

template <class Rcvr>
state(coroutine_handle<promise_type> h, Rcvr&& rr);
2Effects: Initializes

(2.1)handle with std::move(h);
(2.2)rcvr with std::forward<Rcvr>(rr);
(2.3)own-env with own-env-t(get_env(rcvr)) if that expression is valid and own-env-t() otherwise; If neither of these expressions is valid, the program is ill-formed.
(2.4)environment with Environment(own-env) if that expression is valid, otherwise Environment(get_env(rcvr)) if this expression is valid, otherwise Environment(). If neither of these expressions is valid, the program is ill-formed.
~state();
3Effects: Equivalent to:

    if (handle)
      handle.destroy();
void start() & noexcept;
4Effects: Let prom be the object handle.promise(). Associates STATE(prom), RCVR(prom), and SCHED(prom) with *this as follows:

(4.1)STATE(prom) is *this.
(4.2)RCVR(prom) is rcvr.
(4.3)SCHED(prom) is the object initialized with scheduler_type(get_scheduler(get_env(rcvr))) if that expression is valid and scheduler_type() otherwise. If neither of these expressions is valid, the program is ill-formed.
Let st be get_stop_token(get_env(rcvr)). Initializes prom.token and prom.source such that

(4.4)prom.token.stop_requested() returns st.stop_requested();
(4.5)prom.token.stop_possible() returns st.stop_possible(); and
(4.6)for types Fn and Init such that both invocable<Fn> and constructible_from<Fn, Init> are modeled, stop_token_type::callback_type<Fn> models stoppable-callback-for<Fn, stop_token_type, Init>.
After that invokes handle.resume().

9.4.5 Class task::promise_type [task.promise]
namespace std::execution {
  template <class E>
  struct with_error {
    using type = remove_cvref_t<E>;
    type error;
  };
  template <class E>
  with_error(E) -> with_error<E>;

  template <scheduler Sch>
  struct change_coroutine_scheduler {
    using type = remove_cvref_t<Sch>;
    type scheduler;
  };
  template <scheduler Sch>
  change_coroutine_scheduler(Sch) -> change_coroutine_scheduler<Sch>;

  template <class T, class Environment>
  class task<T, Environment>::promise_type {
  public:
    template <class... Args>
    promise_type(const Args&... args);

    task get_return_object() noexcept;

    auto initial_suspend() noexcept;
    auto final_suspend() noexcept;

    void uncaught_exception();
    coroutine_handle<> unhandled_stopped();

    void return_void(); // present only if is_void_v<T> is true;
    template <class V>
    void return_value(V&& value); // present only if is_void_v<T> is false;

    template <class E>
    unspecified yield_value(with_error<E> error);

    template <class A>
    auto await_transform(A&& a);
    template <class Sch>
    auto await_transform(change_coroutine_scheduler<Sch> sch);

    unspecified get_env() const noexcept;

    template <class... Args>
    void* operator new(size_t size, Args&&... args);

    void operator delete(void* pointer, size_t size) noexcept;

  private:
    using error-variant = see below; // exposition only

    allocator_type    alloc;  // exposition only
    stop_source_type  source; // exposition only
    stop_token_type   token;  // exposition only
    optional<T>       result; // exposition only; present only if is_void_v<T> is false;
    error-variant      errors; // exposition only
  };
}
1Let prom be an object of promise_type and let tsk be the task object created by prom.get_return_object(). The description below refers to objects STATE(prom), RCVR(prom), and SCHED(prom) associated with tsk during evalutation of task::state<Rcvr>::start for some receiver Rcvr [task.state].

2error-variant is a variant<monostate, remove_cvref_t<E>...>, with duplicate types removed, where E... are template arguments of the specialization of execution::completion_signatures denoted by error_types.

template <class... Args>
promise_type(const Args&... args);
3Mandates: The first parameter of type allocator_arg_t (if any) is not the last parameter.

4Effects: If Args contains an element of type allocator_arg_t then alloc is initialized with the corresponding next element of args. Otherwise, alloc is initialized with allocator_type().

task get_return_object() noexcept;
5Returns: A task object whose member handle is coroutine_handle<promise_type>::from_promise(*this).

auto initial_suspend() noexcept;
6Returns: An awaitable object of unspecified type ([expr.await]) whose member functions arrange for

(6.1)the calling coroutine to be suspended,
(6.2)the coroutine to be resumed on an execution agent of the execution resource associated with SCHED(*this).
auto final_suspend() noexcept;
7Returns: An awaitable object of unspecified type ([expr.await]) whose member functions arrange for the completion of the asynchronous operation associated with STATE(*this) by invoking:

(7.1)set_error(std::move(RCVR(*this)), std::move(e)) if errors.index() is greater than zero and e is the value held by errors, otherwise
(7.2)set_value(std::move(RCVR(*this))) if is_void<T> is true, and otherwise
(7.3)set_value(std::move(RCVR(*this)), *result).
template <class Err>
auto yield_value(with_error<Err> err);
8Mandates std::move(err.error) is convertible to exactly one of the set_error_t argument types of error_types. Let Cerr be that type.

9Returns: An awaitable object of unspecified type ([expr.await]) whose member functions arrange for the calling coroutine to be suspended and then completes the asynchronous operation associated with STATE(*this) by invoking set_error(std::move(RCVR(*this)), Cerr(std::move(err.error))).

template <sender Sender>
auto await_transform(Sender&& sndr) noexcept;
10Returns: If same_as<inline_scheduler, scheduler_type> is true returns as_awaitable(std::forward<Sender>(sndr), *this); otherwise returns as_awaitable(affine_on(std::forward<Sender>(sndr), SCHED(*this)), *this).

template <class Sch>
auto await_transform(change_coroutine_scheduler<Sch> sch) noexcept;
11Effects: Equivalent to: returns await_transform(just(exchange(SCHED(*this), scheduler_type(sch.scheduler))), *this);

void uncaught_exception();
12Effects: If the signature set_error_t(exception_ptr) is not an element of error_types, calls terminate() (14.6.2 [except.terminate]). Otherwise, stores current_exception() into errors.

coroutine_handle<> unhandled_stopped();
13Effects: Completes the asynchronous operation associated with STATE(*this) by invoking set_stopped(std::move(RCVR(*this))).

14Returns: noop_coroutine().

unspecified get_env() const noexcept;
15Returns: An object env such that queries are forwarded as follows:

(15.1)env.query(get_scheduler) returns scheduler_type(SCHED(*this)).
(15.2)env.query(get_allocator) returns alloc.
(15.3)env.query(get_stop_token) returns token.
(15.4)For any other query q and arguments a... a call to env.query(q, a...) returns STATE(*this).environment.query(q, a...) if this expression is well-formed and forwarding_query(q) is well-formed and is true. Otherwise env.query(q, a...) is ill-formed.
template <class... Args>
void* operator new(size_t size, const Args&... args);
16If there is no parameter with type allocator_arg_t then let alloc be Allocator(). Let arg_next be the parameter following the first allocator_arg_t parameter (if any) and let alloc be Allocator(arg_next). Then PAlloc is allocator_traits<Allocator>::template rebind_alloc<U> where U is an unspecified type whose size and alignment are both __STDCPP_DEFAULT_NEW_ALIGNMENT__.

17Mandates:

(17.1)The first parameter of type allocator_arg_t (if any) is not the last parameter.
(17.2)Allocator(arg_next) is a valid expression if there is a parameter of type allocator_arg_t.
(17.3)allocator_traits<PAlloc>::pointer is a pointer type.
18Effects: Initializes an allocator palloc of type PAlloc with alloc. Uses palloc to allocate storage for the smallest array of U sufficient to provide storage for a coroutine state of size size, and unspecified additional state necessary to ensure that operator delete can later deallocate this memory block with an allocator equal to palloc.

19Returns: A pointer to the allocated storage.

void operator delete(void* pointer, size_t size) noexcept;
20Preconditions: pointer was returned from an invocation of the above overload of operator new with a size argument equal to size.

21Effects: Deallocates the storage pointed to by pointer using an allocator equal to that used to allocate it.